---
layout: post
title: "Edward Gibbon: The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776-1789)"
published: true
---

- I. THE EXTENT AND MILITARY FORCE OF THE EMPIRE, IN THE AGE OF THE ANTONINES
- II. OF THE UNION AND INTERNAL PROSPERITY OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN THE AGE OF THE ANTONINES
- III. OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN THE AGE OF THE ANTONINES (96-180 A.D.)
- IV. THE CRUELTY, FOLLIES, AND MURDER OF COMMODUS—ELECTION OF PERTINAX-HIS ATTEMPTS TO REFORM THE STATE-HIS ASSASSINATION BY THE PRETORIAN GUARDS (180-193 A.D.)
- V. PUBLIC SALE OF THE EMPIRE TO DIDIUS JULIANUS BY THE PRATORIAN GUARDS-CLODIUS ALBINUS IN BRITAIN, PESCENNIUS NIGER IN SYRIA, AND SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS IN PANNONIA, DECLARE AGAINST THE MURDERERS OF PERTINAX-CIVIL WARS AND VICTORY OF SEVERUS OVER HIS THREE RIVALS—RELAXATION OF DISCIPLINE-NEW MAXIMS OF GOVERNMENT (193-197 A.D.)
- VI. THE DEATH OF SEVERUS-TYRANNY OF CARACALLA-USURPATION OF MACRINUS-FOLLIES OF ELAGABALUS-VIRTUES OF ALEXANDER SEVERUS-LICENTIOUSNESS OF THE ARMY-GENERAL STATE OF THE ROMAN FINANCES (208-235 A.D.)
- VII. THE ELEVATION AND TYRANNY OF MAXIMIN-REBELLION IN AFRICA AND ITALY, UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE SENATE-CIVIL WARS AND SEDITIONS—VIOLENT DEATHS OF MAXIMIN AND HIS SON, OF MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS, AND OF THE THREE GORDIANS-USURPATION AND SECULAR GAMES OF PHILIP (235-248 A.D.)
- VIII. OF THE STATE OF PERSIA AFTER THE RESTORATION OF THE MONARCHY BY ARTAXERXES (I65-240 A.D.)
- IX. THE STATE OF GERMANY TILL THE INVASION OF THE BARBARIANS, IN THE TIME OF THE EMPEROR DECIUS
- X. THE EMPERORS DECIUS, GALLUS, EMILIANUS, VALERIAN, AND GALLIENUS-THE GENERAL IRRUPTION OF THE BARBARIANS-THE THIRTY TYRANTS (248-268 A.D.)
- XI. REIGN OF CLAUDIUS-DEFEAT OF THE GOTHS-VICTORIES, TRIUMPH, AND DEATH OF AURELIAN (268-275 A.D.)
- XII. CONDUCT OF THE ARMY AND SENATE AFTER THE DEATH OF AURELIAN-REIGNS OF TACITUS, PROBUS, CARUS, AND HIS SONS (275-285 A.D.)
- XIII. THE REIGN OF DIOCLETIAN AND HIS THREE ASSOCIATES, MAXIMIAN, GALERIUS, AND CONSTANTIUS-GENERAL RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY-THE PERSIAN WAR, VICTORY AND TRIUMPH-THE NEW FORM OF ADMINISTRATION—ABDICATION AND RETIREMENT OF DIOCLETIAN AND MAXIMIAN (285-313 A.D.)
- XIV. TROUBLES AFTER THE ABDICATION OF DIOCLETIAN-DEATH OF CONSTANTIUS-ELEVATION OF CONSTANTINE AND MAXENTIUS--SIX EMPERORS AT THE SAME TIME-DEATH OF MAXIMIAN AND GALERIUS-VICTORIES OF CONSTANTINE OVER MAXENTIUS AND LICINIUS-RE-UNION OF THE EMPIRE UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF CONSTANTINE (305-324 A.D.)
- XV. THE PROGRESS OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION-SENTIMENTS, MANNERS, NUMBERS, AND CONDITIONS OF THE PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS
- XVI. THE CONDUCT OF THE ROMAN GOVERNMENT TOWARDS THE CHRISTIANS, FROM THE REIGN OF NERO TO THAT OF CONSTANTINE (180-313 A.D.)
- XVII. FOUNDATION OF CONSTANTINOPLE-POLITICAL SYSTEM OF CONSTANTINE AND HIS SUCCESSORS MILITARY DISCIPLINE - THE PALACE - THE FINANCES (300-500 A.D.)
- XVIII. CHARACTER OF CONSTANTINE GOTHIC WAR-DEATH OF CONSTANTINE-DIVISION OF THE EMPIRE AMONG HIS THREE SONS-PERSIAN WAR-TRAGIC DEATHS OF CONSTANTINE THE YOUNGER AND CONSTANS-USURPATION OF MAGNENTIUS-CIVIL WAR-VICTORY OF CONSTANTIUS (324-353 A.D.)
- XIX. CONSTANTIUS SOLE EMPEROR-ELEVATION AND DEATH OF GALLUS-DANGER AND ELEVATION OF JULIAN-SARMATIAN AND PERSIAN WARS-VICTORIES OF JULIAN IN GAUL (351-360 A.D.)
- XX. THE MOTIVES, PROGRESS, AND EFFECTS OF THE CONVERSION OF CONSTANTINE LEGAL ESTABLISHMENT AND CONSTITUTION OF THE CHRISTIAN OR CATHOLIC CHURCH (306-438 A.D.)
- XXI. PERSECUTION OF HERESY-THE SCHISM OF THE DONATISTS-THE ARIAN CONTROVERSY-ATHANASIUS-DISTRACTED STATE OF THE CHURCH AND EMPIRE UNDER CONSTANTINE AND HIS SONS-TOLERATION OF PAGANISM (312-362 A.D.)
- XXII. JULIAN IS DECLARED EMPEROR BY THE LEGIONS OF GAUL-HIS MARCH AND SUCCESS THE DEATH OF CONSTANTIUS - CIVIL ADMINISTRATION OF JULIAN (360-361 A.D.)
- XXIII. THE RELIGION OF JULIAN-UNIVERSAL TOLERATION-HE ATTEMPTS TO RESTORE AND REFORM THE PAGAN WORSHIP-TO REBUILD THE TEMPLE OF JERUSALEM-HIS ARTFUL PERSECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS - MUTUAL ZEAL AND INJUSTICE (351-363 A.D.)
- XXIV. RESIDENCE OF JULIAN AT ANTIOCH-HIS SUCCESSFUL EXPEDITION AGAINST THE PERSIANS-PASSAGE OF THE TIGRIS-THE RETREAT AND DEATH OF JULIAN-ELECTION OF JOVIAN-HE SAVES THE ROMAN ARMY BY A DISGRACEFUL TREATY (314-390 A.D.)
- XXV. THE GOVERNMENT AND DEATH OF JOVIAN-ELECTION OF VALENTINIAN, WHO ASSOCIATES HIS BROTHER VALENS, AND MAKES THE FINAL DIVISION OF THE EASTERN AND WESTERN EMPIRES-REVOLT OF PROCOPIUS-CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL ADMINISTRATION — GERMANY - BRITAIN - AFRICA - THE EAST-THE DANUBE-DEATH OF VALENTINIAN-HIS TWO SONS, GRATIAN AND VALENTINIAN II., SUCCEED TO THE WESTERN EMPIRE (343-384 A.D.)
- XXVI. MANNERS OF THE PASTORAL NATIONS-PROGRESS OF THE HUNS FROM CHINA TO EUROPE-FLIGHT OF THE GOTHS-DEFEAT AND DEATH OF VALENSGRATIAN INVESTS THEODOSIUS WITH THE EASTERN EMPIRE-PEACE AND SETTLEMENT OF THE GOTHS (365-395 A.D.)
- XXVII. DEATH OF GRATIAN-RUIN OF ARIANISM-ST. AMBROSE-FIRST CIVIL WAR, AGAINST MAXIMUS—CHARACTER, ADMINISTRATION, AND PENANCE OF THEODOSIUS-DEATH OF VALENTINIAN II.-SECOND CIVIL WAR, AGAINST EUGENIUS-DEATH OF THEODOSIUS (340-397 A.D.)
- XXVIII. FINAL DESTRUCTION OF PAGANISM-INTRODUCTION OF THE WORSHIP OF SAINTS AND RELICS AMONG THE CHRISTIANS (378-420 A.D.)
- XXIX. FINAL DIVISION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE BETWEEN THE SONS OF THEODOSIUS-REIGN OF ARCADIUS AND HONORIUS-ADMINISTRATION OF RUFINUS AND STILICHO-REVOLT AND DEFEAT OF GILDO IN AFRICA (386-398 A.D.)
- XXX. REVOLT OF THE GOTHS-THEY PLUNDER GREECE-TWO GREAT INVASIONS OF ITALY BY ALARIC AND RADAGAISUS- THEY ARE REPULSED BY STILICHO—THE GERMANS OVERRUN GAUL-USURPATION OF CONSTANTINE IN THE WEST-DISGRACE AND DEATH OF STILICHO (395-408 A.D.)
- XXXI. INVASION OF ITALY BY ALARIC-ROME IS THRICE BESIEGED, AND AT LENGTH PILLAGED, BY THE GOTHS—DEATH OF ALARIC-THE GOTHS EVACUATE ITALY - FALL OF CONSTANTINE - GAUL AND SPAIN OCCUPIED BY THE BARBARIANS-INDEPENDENCE OF BRITAIN (408-449 A.D.)
- XXXII. ARCADIUS EMPEROR OF THE EAST-ADMINISTRATION AND DISGRACE OF EUTROPIUS — REVOLT OF GAINAS PERSECUTION OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM—THEODOSIUS II. EMPEROR OF THE EAST—THE PERSIAN WAR, AND DIVISION OF ARMENIA (395-1453 A.D.)
- XXXIII. DEATH OF HONORIUS - VALENTINIAN III. EMPEROR OF THE WEST-ADMINISTRATION OF HIS MOTHER PLACIDIA-AETIUS AND BONIFACE-CONQUEST OF AFRICA BY THE VANDALS (423-455 A.D.)
- XXXIV. THE CHARACTER, CONQUESTS, AND COURI OF ATTILA, KING OF THE HUNS-DEATH OF THEODOSIUS THE YOUNGER-ELEVATION OF MARCIAN TO THE EMPIRE OF THE EAST (376-453 A.D.)
- XXXV. INVASION OF GAUL BY ATTILA-HE IS REPULSED BY AETIUS AND THE VISIGOTHS-ATTILA INVADES AND EVACUATES ITALY-THE DEATHS OF ATTILA, AETIUS, AND VALENTINIAN THE THIRD (419-455 A.D.)
- XXXVI. SACK OF ROME BY GENSERIC-HIS NAVAL DEPREDATIONS-SUCCESSION OF THE LAST EMPERORS OF THE WEST, MAXIMUS, AVITUS, MAJORIAN, SEVERUS, ANTHEMIUS, OLYBRIUS, GLYCERIUS, NEPOS, AUGUSTULUS-TOTAL EXTINCTION OF THE WESTERN EMPIRE-REIGN OF ODOACER, THE FIRST BARBARIAN KING OF ITALY (439-490 A.D.)
- XXXVII. ORIGIN, PROGRESS, AND EFFECTS OF THE MONASTIC LIFE-CONVERSION OF THE BARBARIANS TO CHRISTIANITY AND ARIANISM-PERSECUTION OF THE VANDALS IN AFRICA-EXTINCTION OF ARIANISM (305-712 A.D.)
- XXXVIII. REIGN AND CONVERSION OF CLOVIS-HIS VICTORIES OVER THE ALEMANNI, BURGUNDIANS, AND VISIGOTHS-ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FRENCH MONARCHY IN GAUL-LAWS OF THE BARBARIANS STATE OF THE ROMANS-THE VISIGOTHS OF SPAIN-CONQUESTS OF BRITAIN BY THE SAXONS (449-582 A.D.)
- XXXIX. ZENO AND ANASTASIUS, EMPERORS OF THE EAST—BIRTH, EDUCATION, AND FIRST EXPLOITS OF THEODORIC THE OSTROGOTH-HIS INVASION AND CONQUEST OF ITALY-THE GOTHIC KINGDOM OF ITALY-STATE OF THE WEST-MILITARY AND CIVIL GOVERNMENT-THE SENATOR BOETHIUS—LAST ACTS AND DEATH OF THEODORIC (455-526 A.D.)
- XL. ELEVATION OF JUSTIN THE ELDER-REIGN OF JUSTINIAN—I. THE EMPRESS THEODORA-II. FACTIONS OF THE CIRCUS, AND SEDITION OF CONSTANTINOPLE-III. TRADE AND MANUFACTURE OF SILK—IV. FINANCES AND TAXES-V. EDIFICES OF JUSTINIAN-CHURCH OF ST. SOPHIA—FORTIFICATIONS AND FRONTIERS OF THE EASTERN EMPIRE-ABOLITION OF THE SCHOOLS OF ATHENS AND THE CONSULSHIP OF ROME (482-565 A.D.)
- XLI. CONQUEST OF JUSTINIAN IN THE WEST-CHARACTER AND FIRST CAMPAIGNS OF BELISARIUS-HE INVADES AND SUBDUES THE VANDAL KINGDOM OF AFRICA-HIS TRIUMPH-THE GOTHIC WAR—HE RECOVERS SICILY, NAPLES, AND ROME-SIEGE OF ROME BY THE GOTHS-THEIR RETREAT AND LOSSES-SURRENDER OF RAVENNA-GLORY OF BELISARIUS-HIS DOMESTIC SHAME AND MISFORTUNES (522-620 A.D.)
- XLII. STATE OF THE BARBARIC WORLD-ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LOMBARDS ON THE DANUBE-TRIBES AND INROADS OF THE SCLAVONIANS-ORIGIN, EMPIRE, AND EMBASSIES OF THE TURKS- THE FLIGHT OF THE AVARS-CHOSROES I., OR NUSHIRVAN, KING OF PERSIA-HIS PROSPEROUS REIGN AND WARS WITH THE ROMANS-THE COLCHIAN OR LAZIC WAR (500-582 A.D.)
- XLIII. REBELLIONS OF AFRICA-RESTORATION OF THE GOTHIC KINGDOM BY TOTILA-LOSS AND RECOVERY OF ROME-FINAL CONQUEST OF ITALY BY NARSES-EXTINCTION OF THE OSTROGOTHS—DEFEAT OF THE FRANKS AND ALEMANNI-LAST VICTORY, DISGRACE, AND DEATH OF BELISARIUS-DEATH AND CHARACTER OF JUSTINIAN—COMET, EARTHQUAKES, AND PLAGUE (531-594 A.D.)
- XLIV. IDEA OF THE ROMAN JURISPRUDENCE-THE LAWS OF THE KINGS- THE TWELVE TABLES OF THE DECEMVIRS-THE LAWS OF THE PEOPLE-THE DECREES OF THE SENATE-THE EDICTS OF THE MAGISTRATES AND EMPERORS-AUTHORITY OF THE CIVILIANS- CODE, PANDECTS, NOVELS, AND INSTITUTES OF JUSTINIAN: —I. RIGHTS OF PERSONS—II. RIGHTS OF THINGS—III, PRIVATE INJURIES AND ACTIONS-IV. CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS (527-565 A.D.)
- XLV. REIGN OF THE YOUNGER JUSTIN-EMBASSY OF THE AVARS-THEIR SETTLEMENT ON THE DANUBE-CONQUEST OF ITALY BY THE LOMBARDS-ADOPTION AND REIGN OF TIBERIUS OF MAURICE-STATE OF ITALY UNDER THE LOMBARDS AND THE EXARCHS-OF RAVENNA-DISTRESS OF ROME-CHARACTER AND PONTIFICATE OF GREGORY THE FIRST (565-643 A.D.)
- XLVI. REVOLUTIONS OF PERSIA AFTER THE DEATH OF CHOSROES OR NUSHIRVAN-HIS SON HORMOUZ, A TYRANT, IS DEPOSED-USURPATION OF BAHRAM-FLIGHT AND RESTORATION OF CHOSROES II.-HIS GRATITUDE TO THE ROMANS-THE CHAGAN OF THE AVARS-REVOLT OF THE ARMY AGAINST MAURICE-HIS DEATH-TYRANNY OF PHOCAS-ELEVATION OF HERACLIUS-THE PERSIAN WAR-CHOSROES SUBDUES SYRIA, EGYPT, AND ASIA MINOR-SIEGE OF CONSTANTINOPLE BY THE PERSIANS AND AVARS-PERSIAN EXPEDITIONS-VICTORIES AND TRIUMPH OF HERACLIUS (570-642 A.D.)
- XLVII. THEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE INCARNATION-THE HUMAN AND DIVINE NATURE OF CHRIST-ENMITY OF THE PATRIARCHS OF ALEXANDRIA AND CONSTANTINOPLE-ST. CYRIL AND NESTORIUS-THIRD GENERAL COUNCIL OF EPHESUS-HERESY OF EUTYCHES FOURTH GENERAL COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON—CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DISCORD-INTOLERANCE OF JUSTINIAN-THE THREE CHAPTERS-THE MONOTHELITE CONTROVERSY-STATE OF THE ORIENTAL SECTS-I. THE NESTORIANS-II. THE JACOBITES-III. THE MARONITES-IV. THE ARMENIANS—V. THE COPTS AND ABYSSINIANS (412-1632 A.D.)
- XIVIII. PLAN OF THE LAST TWO (QUARTO) VOLUMES-SUCCESSION AND CHARACTERS OF THE GREEK EMPERORS OF CONSTANTINOPLE, FROM THE TIME OF HERACLIUS TO THE LATIN CONQUEST (64I-I185 A.D.)
- XLIX. INTRODUCTION, WORSHIP, AND PERSECUTION OF IMAGES—REVOLT OF ITALY AND ROME-TEMPORAL DOMINION OF THE POPES CONQUEST OF ITALY BY THE FRANKS-ESTABLISHMENT OF IMAGES CHARACTER AND CORONATION OF CHARLEMAGNE-RESTORATION AND DECAY OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN THE WEST-INDEPENDENCE OF ITALY—CONSTITUTION OF THE GERMANIC BODY (726-1378 A.D.)
- L. DESCRIPTION OF ARABIA AND ITS INHABITANTS-BIRTH, CHARACTER, AND DOCTRINE OF MOHAMMED—HE PREACHES AT MECCA-FLIES TO MEDINA-PROPAGATES HIS RELIGION BY THE SWORD-VOLUNTARY OR RELUCTANT SUBMISSION OF THE ARABS-HIS DEATH AND SUCCESSORS-THE CLAIMS AND FORTUNES OF ALI AND HIS DESCENDANTS (569-680 A.D.)
- LI. THE CONQUEST OF PERSIA, SYRIA, EGYPT, AFRICA, AND SPAIN, BY THE ARABS OR SARACENS-EMPIRE OF THE CALIPHS, OR SUCCESSORS OF MOHAMMED-STATE OF THE CHRISTIANS, ETC., UNDER THEIR GOVERNMENT (632-718 A.D.)
- LII. THE TWO SIEGES OF CONSTANTINOPLE BY THE ARABS—THEIR INVASION OF FRANCE, AND DEFEAT BY CHARLES MARTEL-CIVIL WAR OF THE OMMIADES AND ABBASSIDES-LEARNING OF THE ARABS—LUXURY OF THE CALIPHS-NAVAL ENTERPRISES ON CRETE, SICILY, AND ROME-DECAY AND DIVISION OF THE EMPIRE OF THE CALIPHS-DEFEATS AND VICTORIES OF THE GREEK EMPERORS (668-1055 A.D.)
- LIII. STATE OF THE EASTERN EMPIRE IN THE TENTH CENTURY-EXTENT AND DIVISION-WEALTH AND REVENUE-PALACE OF CONSTANTINOPLE-TITLES AND OFFICES-PRIDE AND POWER OF THE EMPERORS-TACTICS OF THE GREEKS, ARABS, AND FRANKS-LOSS OF THE LATIN TONGUE-STUDIES AND SOLITUDE OF THE GREEKS (733-988 A.D.)
- LIV. ORIGIN AND DOCTRINE OF THE PAULICIANS-THEIR PERSECUTION BY THE GREEK EMPERORS-REVOLT IN ARMENIA, ETC.-TRANSPLANTATION INTO THRACE-PROPAGATION IN THE WEST-THE SEEDS, CHARACTER, AND CONSEQUENCES OF THE REFORMATION (660-1200 A.D.)
- IV. THE BULGARIANS- ORIGIN, MIGRATIONS, AND SETTLEMENT OF THE HUNGARIANS-THEIR INROADS IN THE EAST AND WEST-THE MONARCHY OF RUSSIA-GEOGRAPHY AND TRADE-WARS OF THE RUSSIANS AGAINST THE GREEK EMPIRE-CONVERSION OF THE BARBARIANS (640-1100 A.D.)
- LVI. THE SARACENS, FRANKS, AND GREEKS, IN ITALY-FIRST ADVENTURES AND SETTLEMENT OF THE NORMANS-CHARACTER AND CONQUESTS OF ROBERT GUISCARD, DUKE OF APULIA-DELIVERANCE OF SICILY BY HIS BROTHER ROGER-VICTORIES OF ROBERT OVER THE EMPERORS OF THE EAST AND WEST-ROGER, KING OF SICILY, INVADES AFRICA AND GREECE-THE EMPEROR MANUEL COMNENUS-WARS OF THE GREEKS AND NORMANS-EXTINCTION OF THE NORMANS (840-1204 A.D.)
- LVII. THE TURKS OF THE HOUSE OF SELJUK-THEIR REVOLT AGAINST MAHMUD, CONQUEROR OF HINDOSTAN-TOGRUL SUBDUES PERSIA, AND PROTECTS THE CALIPHS-DEFEAT AND CAPTIVITY OF THE EMPEROR ROMANUS DIOGENES BY ALP ARSLAN-POWER AND MAGNIFICENCE OF MALEK SHAH-CONQUEST OF ASIA MINOR AND SYRIA-STATE AND OPPRESSION OF JERUSALEM (980-1152 A.D.)
- LVIII. ORIGIN AND NUMBERS OF THE FIRST CRUSADE-CHARACTERS OF THE LATIN PRINCES-THEIR MARCH TO CONSTANTINOPLE-POLICY OF THE GREEK EMPEROR ALEXIUS-CONQUESI OF NICE, ANTIOCH, AND JERUSALEM, BY THE FRANKS DELIVERANCE OF THE HOLY SEPULCHRE-GOD-FREY OF BOUILION, FIRST KING OF JERUSALEM (1095-1369 A.D.)
- LIX, PRESERVATION OF THE GREEK EMPIRE-NUMBERS, PASSAGE, AND EVENI OF THE SECOND AND THIRD CRUSADES-ST. BERNARD-REIGN OF SALADIN IN EGYPT AND SYRIA-HIS CONQUEST OF JERUSALEM-NAVAL CRUSADES-RICHARD THE FIRST OF ENGLAND-POPE INNOCENT THE THIRD; AND THE FOURTH AND FIFTH CRUSADES—THE EMPEROR FREDERIC THE SECOND-LOUIS THE NINTH OF FRANCE; AND THE TWO LAST CRUSADES-EXPULSION OF THE LATINS OR FRANKS BY THE MAMALUKES (109I-1517 A.D.)
- LX. SCHISM OF THE GREEKS AND LATINS-STATE OF CONSTANTINOPLE-REVOLT OF THE BULGARIANS—ISAAC ANGELUS DETHRONED BY HIS BROTHER ALEXIUS-ORIGIN OF THE FOURTH CRUSADE-ALLIANCE OF THE FRENCH AND VENETIANS WITH THE SON OF ISAAC-THEIR NAVAL EXPEDITION TO CONSTANTINOPLE-THE TWO SIEGES AND FINAL CONQUEST OF THE CITY (697-1204 A.D.)
- LXI. PARTITION OF THE EMPIRE BY THE FRENCH AND VENETIANS-FIVE LATIN EMPERORS OF THE HOUSES OF FLANDERS AND COURTENAY-THEIR WARS AGAINST THE BULGARIANS AND GREEKS WEAKNESS AND POVERTY OF THE LATIN EMPIRE—RECOVERY OF CONSTANTINOPLE BY THE GREEKS- GENERAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE CRUSADES (I020-1261 A.D.)
- LXII. THE GREEK EMPERORS OF NICE AND CONSTANTINOPLE-ELEVATION AND REIGN OF MICHAEL PALAOLOGUS-HIS FALSE UNION WITH THE POPE AND THE LATIN CHURCH-HOSTILE DESIGNS OF CHARLES OF ANJOU-REVOLT OF SICILY-REVOLUTIONS AND PRESENT STATE OF ATHENS (1204-1456 A.D.)
- LXIII. CIVIL WARS, AND RUIN OF THE GREEK EMPIRE-REIGNS OF ANDRONICUS THE ELDER AND YOUNGER, AND JOHN PALAOLOGUS- REGENCY, REVOLT, REIGN, AND ABDICATION OF JOHN CANTACUZENE-ESTABLISHMENT OF A GENOESE COLONY AT PERA OR GALATA (1282-139I A.D.)
- LXIV. CONQUESTS OF ZINGIS KHAN AND THE MOGULS FROM CHINA TO POLAND-ESCAPE OF CONSTANTINOPLE AND THE GREEKS-ORIGIN OF THE OTTOMAN TURKS IN BITHYNIA-REIGNS AND VICTORIES OF OTHMAN, ORCHAN, AMURATH THE FIRST, AND BAJAZET THE FIRST-FOUNDATION AND PROGRESS OF THE TURKISH MONARCHY IN ASIA AND EUROPE-DANGER OF CONSTANTINOPLE AND THE GREEK EMPIRE (1206-1425 A.D.)
- LXV. ELEVATION OF TIMOUR OR TAMERLANE TO THE THRONE OF SAMARCAND-HIS CONQUESTS IN PERSIA, GEORGIA, TARTARY, RUSSIA, INDIA, SYRIA, AND ANATOLIA-HIS TURKISH WAR—DEFEAT AND CAPTIVITY OF BAJAZET-DEATH OF TIMOUR-CIVIL WAR OF THE SONS OF BAJAZET-RESTORATION OF THE TURKISH MONARCHY BY MOHAMMED THE FIRST-SIEGE OF CONSTANTINOPLE BY AMURATH THE SECOND (I36I-1451 A.D.)
- LXVI. APPLICATIONS OF THE EASTERN EMPERORS TO THE POPES-VISITS TO THE WEST OF JOHN THE FIRST, MANUEL, AND JOHN THE SECOND, PALEOLOGUS-UNION OF THE GREEK AND LATIN CHURCHES PROMOTED BY THE COUNCIL OF BASIL, AND CONCLUDED AT FERRARA AND FLORENCE-STATE OF LITERATURE AT CONSTANTINOPLE-ITS REVIVAL IN ITALY BY THE GREEK FUGITIVES-CURIOSITY AND EMULATION OF THE LATINS (1339-1500 A.D.)
- LXVII. SCHISM OF THE GREEKS AND LATINS-REIGN AND CHARACTER OF AMURATH THE SECOND CRUSADE OF LADISLAUS, KING OF HUNGARY-HIS DEFEAT AND DEATH (1421-1467 A.D.)
- LXVIII. REIGN AND CHARACTER OF MOHAMMED THE SECOND—SIEGE, ASSAULT, AND FINAL CONQUEST OF CONSTANTINOPLE BY THE TURKS-DEATH OF CONSTANTINE PALEOLOGUS- SERVITUDE OF THE GREEKS-EXTINCTION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN THE EAST-CONSTERNATION OF EUROPE-CONQUESTS AND DEATH OF MOHAMMED THE SECOND (1451-1481 A.D.)
- LXIX. STATE OF ROME FROM THE TWELFTH CENTURY—TEMPORAL DOMINION OF THE POPES-SEDITIONS OF THE CITY-POLITICAL HERESY OF ARNOLD OF BRESCIA-RESTORATION OF THE REPUBLIC-THE SENATORS-PRIDE OF THE ROMANS-THEIR WARS-THEY ARE DEPRIVED OF THE ELECTION AND PRESENCE OF THE POPES, WHO RETIRE TO AVIGNON-THE JUBILEE-NOBLE FAMILIES OF ROME-FEUD OF THE COLONNA AND URSINI (800-1500 A.D.)
- LXX. CHARACTER AND CORONATION OF PETRARCH-RESTORATION OF THE FREEDOM AND GOVERNMENT OF ROME BY THE TRIBUNE RIENZI-HIS VIRTUES AND VICES, HIS EXPULSION AND DEATH-RETURN OF THE POPES FROM AVIGNON-GREAT SCHISM OF THE WEST-REUNION OF THE LATIN CHURCH-LAST STRUGGLES OF ROMAN LIBERTY—STATUTES OF ROME-FINAL SETTLEMENT OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL STATE (I304-1590 A.D.)
- LXXI. PROSPECT OF THE RUINS OF ROME IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY-FOUR CAUSES OF DECAY AND DESTRUCTION-EXAMPLE OF THE COLISEUM-RENOVATION OF THE CITY-CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE WORK (1332-1430 A.D.)
